Mastering Continuous Observability for Developers
=================================================

.. include-twig:: `youtube-iframe`
    :title: Introducing Blackfire
    :src: https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/UlDMOoSrvXg?rel=0&showinfo=0&modestbranding=1&autoplay=0
    :width: 700px
    :height: 394px

Video Transcript
----------------

 Hi there, and welcome to Blackfire.

In this video, we'll explore how Blackfire can transform how you build, grow,
and optimize your web applications.

Whether you're a developer, an architect, or an engineering leader, understanding
Blackfire's purpose is key to unlocking its full potential.

So What is Blackfire?

Blackfire is a continuous observability solution designed to empower developers
like you to understand how your applications behave in real time.

Imagine having a tool that monitors your app performance, helps you proactively
spot bottlenecks, and evaluates the impact of changes before they go live.

Blackfire provides a seamless way to stay in control, even during critical
situations, by speeding up the discovery process and facilitating long term
performance optimization.

In other words, it helps you navigate through crises confidently, knowing you
can tackle issues head on.

Our journey starts with four key pillars, defining the core values of Blackfire.

Performance as a Feature
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, performance as a feature.

 Blackfire makes performance optimization a straightforward part of your workflow.

Not only does it help you anticipate the impact of new features before
deployment, but it also ensures that you can remove that black box effect,
giving you better insight on how your code behaves.

Plus, it helps you enforce quality standards every step of the way.

Crisis management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, crisis management.

 We have all experienced those sudden issues, threatening to bring everything to
a standstill.

With Blackfire, you can prevent crisis before they escalate, mitigate them
quickly if they do happen, and retain full control even during high pressure situations.

No more feeling like you're in the dark when things go wrong.

Time Control
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Third, time control.

Blackfire speed ups the discovery process, meaning you will spend less time
searching for answers and more time adding value to your end users.

Our platform also supports long lasting optimizations through automated testing,
allowing your work to have a lasting impact.

Opinionated Do-it-for-me Platform
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

And finally, Blackfire is an opinionated do it for me platform.

Once installed, Blackfire works right out of the box. Forget about creating
custom dashboards or telemetry probes, the information you need is available
immediately.

You can invest your time where it matters most, optimizing your application
rather than managing your observability platform.

 With Blackfire, you gain a comprehensive view of your application's real time
performance and can drill down the root cause of an issue quickly and easily.

It's about empowering developers to confidently build resilient, high performing
software, even during the most challenging times.
